# GraphFormer


<!-- WARNING: THIS FILE WAS AUTOGENERATED! DO NOT EDIT! -->

> GraphFormer is a work in progess…

## Introduction

In this blog post we present a novel hybrid architecture that combines
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and Transformers to process and analyze
complex relational data. This architecture is designed to capture both
the intricate network structure of interconnected entities and rich
feature sets with individual data points. By leveraging PyTorch
Geometric for graph-based learning and PyTorch’s Transformer
implementation for sequence modeling, our approach offers a flexible and
powerful framework for a wide range of applications involving graph
structured relational data.

## Architecture Overview

The proposed architecture integrates Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and
Transformers to effectively process and analyze complex relational data.
The GNN component, implemented using PyTorch Geometric, serves as the
foundation for modeling entity relationships. It employs multiple Graph
Convolutional Network (GCN) layers to learn entity embeddings,
effectively capturing complex interdependencies and structural
information inherent in the data. This approach allows for a compact yet
comprehensive representation of intricate entity networks.

![Graph
Structur](index_files/figure-commonmark/cell-5-1-0eed602f-f32f-4352-8f43-7b927a34bf29.png)

Figure 1: Representation of Graph-Structured Data as Input to the Hybrid
GNN-Transformer Architecture

In conjunction with the GNN, we introduce a novel
“TransformerEncoderForEntitiesAndFeatures” model. This bespoke
Transformer-based component is engineered to amalgamate the learned
entity embeddings with supplementary feature sets. The integration
facilitates a nuanced matching between entities and external factors,
thereby enhancing the model’s contextual understanding and analytical
capabilities.

![GNN
Component](index_files/figure-commonmark/cell-7-1-b982e073-575d-41c1-b7b5-fe186b6d2c27.png)

Figure 2: GNN Component of the Hybrid Architecture

![Transformer
Component](index_files/figure-commonmark/cell-8-1-69f60268-d1b9-4e4e-8b88-b62088f6e1bc.png)

Figure 3: Transformer Component of the Hybrid Architecture

## Key Innovations

The primary innovation of this architecture lies in its dual
representation learning capability. The GNN component extracts entity
embeddings based on relational structure, while the Transformer
integrates these embeddings with additional features. This approach
yields rich, context-aware representations that encapsulate both the
inherent structure of the data and the nuanced characteristics of
individual entities. Moreover, the architecture leverages the
Transformer’s attention mechanism to enable flexible entity-feature
matching. This mechanism dynamically weights various aspects of entities
and features contingent on the context, allowing for a more
sophisticated and adaptive analysis. Such flexibility is desirable when
dealing with complex, real-world data where the significance of
different factors may vary depending on the specific context. Lastly,
the architecture demonstrates scalability to large, complex datasets. It
is designed to handle a substantial number of entities and intricate
relationship structures, making it particularly suitable for real-world
applications involving extensive relational data. This scalability
ensures the viability of our approach even as datasets grow in size and
complexity, addressing a common challenge in domains dealing with
relational data at scale.

## Details & Case Study

### Author’s Note

This case study is a simple demonstration of a possible use case for
this architecture. The broader strokes are detailed below, but to follow
along and experiment yourself, feel free to reference this GitHub
Repository:
`https://github.com/ethanshenley/Hybrid-GNN-Transformer-Example`

## The Datasets

To demonstrate the efficacy of our architecture, we present its
application in NextGenEd, a personalized course recommendation system
for educational institutions. In this context, courses serve as entities
(nodes) in the graph, with prerequisites and corequisites forming the
relationships (edges). Student characteristics and preferences are
incorporated as additional features.

We used two data sets to demonstrate the use of this hybrid
architecture. We generated a pseudo course-catalog with 100 courses to
mimic the structure typically found in university curricula. This
dataset comprises mixed data types, encompassing both semantic and
relational information. The semantic information was used to construct
the nodes, while the relational information was used to construct the
edges.

    CRN,Code,Title,Department,Credits,Description,Level,Prerequisites,Corequisites,Topics,Required for Majors,Learning Outcomes,Average GPA,Typical Semesters Offered,Difficulty Rating,Workload Hours/Week,Typical Class Size,Online Offering Available

Figure 4: Dataset Schema for the Course Catalog including semantic and
relational information.

    69254,MATH656,"""Advanced Topics in Algebraic Geometry""",MATH,4.0,"This course delves into advanced topics in algebraic geometry, covering concepts such as schemes, cohomology, and intersection theory. Students will explore modern developments in the field and engage with challenging problems to deepen their understanding of algebraic structures and geometric properties.",600,MATH159|MATH154,,"1. Algebra
    2. Calculus
    3. Geometry
    4. Probability and Statistics
    5. Number Theory",HIST Major,"1. Solve algebraic equations and inequalities using appropriate techniques and strategies|
    2. Apply principles of calculus to analyze and solve mathematical problems in various contexts|
    3. Demonstrate an understanding of geometric concepts and their applications in real-world situations|
    4. Analyze and interpret data using probability and statistical methods|
    5. Explore and apply number theory concepts to solve mathematical problems efficiently.",2.863217500832427,Summer|Spring|Fall,4.12909614744286,12.020213472438389,52,False

Figure 5: Example Course from our Course Catalog

To simulate the diverse characteristics of a student population, we
generated a dataset of 100 student profiles. This dataset serves to
demonstrate the integration of supplementary feature sets in generating
personalized recommendations. The student dataset schema (Figure 6)
showcases the heterogeneous nature of student data, incorporating both
categorical and continuous variables, thereby testing the architecture’s
capacity to process and integrate diverse data types.

    Student ID,Name,Date of Birth,Entry Date,Expected Graduation,Major,Minor,GPA,Total Credits,Academic Standing,Gender,Ethnicity,First Generation College,High School GPA,SAT Score,ACT Score,Current Courses,Academic Plan,Study Abroad Experience,Internship Experience,Research Experience,Extracurricular Activities,Attendance Rate,Assignment Completion Rate,Preferred Learning Style,Career Goals,Tutoring Sessions,Academic Coaching Sessions,Average Study Hours/Week,Work Hours/Week

Figure 6: Dataset Schema for the Student Dataset

    S548323,Sophia Rodriguez,1999-11-07,2024-08-01,2028-05-15,HIST,,2.46,85,Good Standing,Male,True,3.06,,,65260|13043|51212,64891|75519|17292|80475|33652|82386|41090|13039|63396|90434,False,False,False,,0.8341785355410825,0.9285145448540364,Auditory,"1. To become a software engineer at a top technology company
    2. To pursue a career in marketing and eventually become a brand manager
    3. To work in public health and contribute to improving healthcare access for underserved communities",8,4,21.914441233047334,7.836155882407471

Figure 6: Example Student from the Student Dataset

By employing these two interconnected datasets, we aim to evaluate the
architecture’s ability to effectively model complex course relationships
via the GNN component and integrate diverse student attributes via the
Transformer component. This experimental setup allows us to assess the
architecture’s performance in a somewhat-realistic educational context.

## Model Architecture

The GNN component for modeling course relationships is implemented as
follows:

``` python
import torch
class CourseGNN(torch.nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, num_features, hidden_channels, num_classes):
        super(CourseGNN, self).__init__()
        self.conv1 = GCNConv(num_features, hidden_channels)
        self.conv2 = GCNConv(hidden_channels, hidden_channels)
        self.conv3 = GCNConv(hidden_channels, num_classes)


    def forward(self, x, edge_index):
        x = F.relu(self.conv1(x, edge_index))
        x = F.relu(self.conv2(x, edge_index))
        x = self.conv3(x, edge_index)
        return x
```

    ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'torch'
    [0;31m---------------------------------------------------------------------------[0m
    [0;31mModuleNotFoundError[0m                       Traceback (most recent call last)
    Cell [0;32mIn[1], line 1[0m
    [0;32m----> 1[0m [38;5;28;01mimport[39;00m [38;5;21;01mtorch[39;00m
    [1;32m      2[0m [38;5;28;01mclass[39;00m [38;5;21;01mCourseGNN[39;00m(torch[38;5;241m.[39mnn[38;5;241m.[39mModule):
    [1;32m      3[0m     [38;5;28;01mdef[39;00m [38;5;21m__init__[39m([38;5;28mself[39m, num_features, hidden_channels, num_classes):

    [0;31mModuleNotFoundError[0m: No module named 'torch'

The Transformer-based component for student-course matching is
implemented as:

``` python
# Create Positional Encoder
class PositionalEncoding(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, d_model, max_len=5000):
        super().__init__()
        position = torch.arange(max_len).unsqueeze(1)
        div_term = torch.exp(torch.arange(0, d_model, 2) * (-math.log(10000.0) / d_model))
        pe = torch.zeros(max_len, 1, d_model)
        pe[:, 0, 0::2] = torch.sin(position * div_term)
        pe[:, 0, 1::2] = torch.cos(position * div_term)
        self.register_buffer('pe', pe)


    def forward(self, x):
        return x + self.pe[:x.size(0)]


class TransformerEncoderForStudentAndCourses(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, input_dim, d_model, nhead, num_layers, dropout=0.1):
        super().__init__()
        self.input_projection = nn.Linear(input_dim, d_model)
        self.pos_encoder = PositionalEncoding(d_model)
        encoder_layers = nn.TransformerEncoderLayer(d_model, nhead, dim_feedforward=4*d_model, dropout=dropout)
        self.transformer_encoder = nn.TransformerEncoder(encoder_layers, num_layers)
        self.output_projection = nn.Linear(d_model, d_model)
        self.layer_norm = nn.LayerNorm(d_model)


    def forward(self, src):
        src = self.input_projection(src)
        src = self.pos_encoder(src)
        output = self.transformer_encoder(src)
        output = self.output_projection(output)
        return self.layer_norm(output)
```

    NameError: name 'nn' is not defined
    [0;31m---------------------------------------------------------------------------[0m
    [0;31mNameError[0m                                 Traceback (most recent call last)
    Cell [0;32mIn[2], line 2[0m
    [1;32m      1[0m [38;5;66;03m# Create Positional Encoder[39;00m
    [0;32m----> 2[0m [38;5;28;01mclass[39;00m [38;5;21;01mPositionalEncoding[39;00m([43mnn[49m[38;5;241m.[39mModule):
    [1;32m      3[0m     [38;5;28;01mdef[39;00m [38;5;21m__init__[39m([38;5;28mself[39m, d_model, max_len[38;5;241m=[39m[38;5;241m5000[39m):
    [1;32m      4[0m         [38;5;28msuper[39m()[38;5;241m.[39m[38;5;21m__init__[39m()

    [0;31mNameError[0m: name 'nn' is not defined

Below is the training loop used to create the contextualized embeddings:

``` python
input_dim = X_student_tensor.shape[1] + embeddings.shape[1]
d_model = 256  #  you can adjust this to whatever fits your data best
nhead = 8  # Number of attention heads
num_layers = 3  # Number of transformer layers
transformer_encoder = TransformerEncoderForStudentAndCourses(input_dim, d_model, nhead, num_layers)


def train_transformer_encoder():
    optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(transformer_encoder.parameters(), lr=0.001)
    criterion = nn.MSELoss()
   
    num_epochs = 100
    for epoch in range(num_epochs):
        total_loss = 0
        for i, student in enumerate(X_student_tensor):
            try:
                # Get current courses for the student
                current_courses = student_data.iloc[i]['Current Courses'].split('|')
               
                # Get average embedding of current courses
                course_indices = [course_catalog_df[course_catalog_df['Code'] == course].index[0]
                                  for course in current_courses
                                  if course in course_catalog_df['Code'].values]
                if not course_indices:
                    continue
                target_embedding = embeddings[course_indices].mean(dim=0)
               
                # Forward pass
                combined_encoding = get_student_and_course_encoding(student, target_embedding)
                loss = criterion(combined_encoding.squeeze(), target_embedding)
               
                # Backward pass and optimize
                optimizer.zero_grad()
                loss.backward()
                optimizer.step()
                total_loss += loss.item()
            except Exception as e:
                print(f"Error processing student {i}: {str(e)}")
                continue
       
        if (epoch + 1) % 10 == 0:
            print(f'Epoch [{epoch+1}/{num_epochs}], Loss: {total_loss:.4f}')
```

    NameError: name 'X_student_tensor' is not defined
    [0;31m---------------------------------------------------------------------------[0m
    [0;31mNameError[0m                                 Traceback (most recent call last)
    Cell [0;32mIn[4], line 1[0m
    [0;32m----> 1[0m input_dim [38;5;241m=[39m [43mX_student_tensor[49m[38;5;241m.[39mshape[[38;5;241m1[39m] [38;5;241m+[39m embeddings[38;5;241m.[39mshape[[38;5;241m1[39m]
    [1;32m      2[0m d_model [38;5;241m=[39m [38;5;241m256[39m  [38;5;66;03m#  you can adjust this to whatever fits your data best[39;00m
    [1;32m      3[0m nhead [38;5;241m=[39m [38;5;241m8[39m  [38;5;66;03m# Number of attention heads[39;00m

    [0;31mNameError[0m: name 'X_student_tensor' is not defined

## Case Study Results:

In the NextGenEd case study, our architecture demonstrated superior
performance in generating personalized course recommendations compared
to traditional methods. The system successfully captured complex course
interdependencies while accounting for individual student
characteristics, leading to more relevant and contextualized
recommendations.

A key feature of this recommendation system is the approach to
calculating similarity scores. The base similarity is derived from the
cosine similarity between the combined encodings of the student features
and course embeddings. The function also implements several filters to
refine recommendations, such as excluding courses the student has
already taken or planned, courses that are too difficult based on the
student’s GPA, and courses for which the student doesn’t meet the
prerequisites. This approach to similarity scores results in
recommendations that are not only relevant to the student’s academic
profile but also balanced and practical. In most use cases, a similar
function will be required to filter recommendations based on relevant
criteria.

To demonstrate this system, we used a sample student from our Student
Dataset to generate recommendations:

``` python
student_id = 'S631127'
recommended_courses = recommend_courses_for_student(student_id)
print(f"\nRecommended courses for student {student_id}:")
for course in recommended_courses:
    print(f"{course['Code']} - {course['Title']} (Similarity: {course['Similarity']:.4f})")
```

The selected student profile (ID: S631127) represents a Biology major
with diverse interests spanning tech entrepreneurship, medicine, and
environmental conservation. The generated student profile is below.

    S631127,Emily Johnson,2002-03-06,2022-08-01,2026-05-15,BIO,,3.25,15,Academic Probation,Female,African American,False,2.95,,,32970|55791|64748|49740,47591|78068|13855|64891|44708|16098|65260,False,True,True,Activity:Member|Activity:Member,0.8048748714448314,0.6242695622011141,Reading/Writing,"1. To become a successful tech entrepreneur and start their own business.
    2. To pursue a career in healthcare and become a doctor or nurse.
    3. To work in the field of environmental conservation and contribute to sustainability efforts.",10,3,16.087472018949384,18.525877782533964

For this student, the system generated the following course
recommendations:

    Recommended courses for student S631127:
    BIO218 - "Ecology and Conservation Biology" (Similarity: 1.1000)
    BIO159 - "Introduction to Cellular Biology" (Similarity: 1.1000)
    CS111 - "Introduction to Computer Science Fundamentals" (Similarity: 1.0000)
    CS262 - "Web Development Fundamentals" (Similarity: 1.0000)
    PHYS100 - "Principles of Physics: Mechanics and Motion" (Similarity: 1.0000)

These recommendations demonstrate the system’s ability to synthesize
information from the student’s academic history, major requirements, and
personal interests to generate a diverse and relevant set of course
suggestions. The recommendations span the student’s primary field of
study (Biology) while also incorporating courses aligned with their
expressed interest in technology (Computer Science courses). The GNN
component effectively learned course embeddings that encoded not only
individual course attributes but also their positions within the broader
curriculum. This allowed for a more nuanced understanding of course
relationships beyond simple prerequisites. The Transformer component, by
integrating these course embeddings with student features, enabled
highly personalized recommendations. It demonstrated an ability to
dynamically adjust the importance of different factors based on the
specific student-course pairing, leading to recommendations that were
both academically sound and tailored to individual student needs and
preferences.

## Broader Applications

While our case study demonstrates the effectiveness of this hybrid
GNN-Transformer architecture in an educational context, its potential
extends far beyond course recommendations. The architecture is
particularly well-suited for domains characterized by complex relational
data structures where both network topology and node/edge attributes
play crucial roles. In bioinformatics, for instance, this architecture
could be used in protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis. The
GNN component could model the intricate network of protein interactions,
while the Transformer could integrate additional data such as gene
expression levels, subcellular localization, and functional annotations.
This could potentially lead to more accurate predictions of protein
functions, identification of disease-related protein complexes, or
discovery of novel drug targets. Another promising application lies in
financial fraud detection. Here, the GNN could model transaction
networks, capturing patterns of fund flows between accounts. The
Transformer could then incorporate time-series data of individual
transactions, account holder information, and external factors like
economic indicators. This combination could potentially enhance the
ability to detect complex fraud schemes that exploit intricate networks
of seemingly unrelated transactions. These are just a couple of examples
that illustrate how our hybrid architecture can be adapted to various
domains where understanding complex relationships within data is
desired. By combining the strengths of GNNs in capturing structural
information with the Transformer’s ability to process rich, multi-modal
feature sets, this approach opens up new possibilities for tackling
challenging problems across diverse fields.

## Conclusion

Our hybrid GNN-Transformer architecture presents a flexible approach to
modeling and analyzing complex relational data. By combining the
strengths of graph-based learning and attention mechanisms, it can
potentially assist with developing sophisticated, context-aware systems
across a wide range of applications. The architecture’s ability to
capture both structural relationships and rich feature sets, coupled
with its scalability to large datasets, makes it a promising tool for
tackling complex real-world problems involving relational data. As
demonstrated in the NextGenEd case study, this approach can lead to more
accurate and personalized recommendations, potentially improving
decision-making processes in various domains. Future work could explore
the architecture’s performance in other domains, investigate techniques
for further improving scalability, and examine methods for incorporating
temporal dynamics into the model. Additionally, research into
interpretability techniques specific to this hybrid architecture could
provide valuable insights into its decision-making processes, further
enhancing its utility in practical applications.
